(11) Introduction
The memory scene is one of the most anticlimactic yet compositionally rich scenes from Bladerunner. In this scene K, our replicant blade runner protagonist, visits Dr. Ana Stelline to figure out whether a memory that he has is real or not. What makes the scene interesting is not the elements of the scene but rather what elements it is lacking. It poses a stark contrast to the rest of the film, serving as a point of contemplation. This is not saying it is an emotionless scene, as there are plenty of narrative clues and set pieces that serve the greater story.
For context, previous scenes were shot in neo-noir fashion, with deep penetrating lights that cast hard shadows upon streetside objects. Shot 1 starts with a long shot of vibrant forest, softly lit from what appears to be the sun. This arrives with great juxtaposition, as this is impossible in this narrative. The viewer knows that such an environment cannot exist after the collapse of an ecosystem.  The sun creates natural light through the canopy, diffusing off of foliage, creating low key lighting. This welcoming light shines through the leaves accompanied by the sounds of forest animals. The establishing shots give way to successive cuts shortening the shot distance, gradually focusing the viewer's attention to a small beetle perched on top of a leaf. During Shot 4, the shallow depth of field leaves only the beetle in focus. We see the bug mutate, growing a new antenna followed by a flash and a technological sound. At Shot 5, we see our first piece of technology in this scene, a metal rotary device. Unlike other devices within the film, this one is entirely mechanical. By Shot 7, we see utilization of frame within frame. Dark branches surround Dr. Stelline but a sun spot halos her. This theme of light vs dark is ever present in this scene. Her work is interrupted by K, whose entrance is marked with a loud alert. The natural forest blinks away leaving an austere room. Shot 10, the reverse of the previous shot, uses a mobile camera to track Dr. Stelline’s movements to the visitor area. Surprisingly, this is the only time the camera is mobile in this entire scene. What is left is nothing like the forest…


(21) Reflections
Once the forest flickers away, the room that is left is barren and sterile. The space reveals itself to be a concrete dome etched with arced grooves. The light visible provides most of our lighting, staunchly cold and pure unlike the previous section. Shot 17, reveals the back of the room into the visitor area. We see a rule of thirds: a futon bed and storage/medical equipment. It looks like a prison cell. Practically the room makes sense; any florishings can influence the way Dr. Stelline makes her memories. The white setting and costume serve both as in a practical sense but also to show how isolated Dr. Stelline is from the outside world. The room is clean, unlike the streets outside. Color theory is used to show the difference between the two characters. Dr. Stelline lives in this gray white world wearing white clothes while K comes from a darker more sinister world wearing darker clothes. The choice of separation even extends to how each side muffles the others speech further separates the two characters by their qualities. A window separates them, which I think is a fantastic way to convey this idea. Their two worlds are like water and oil. These people come from wildly different backgrounds yet at the same need each other to demystify a problem.
Another dichotomic element is size. Whenever Dr. Stelline is shown in this section, it is always at a higher angle which positions her closer to the corner of the frame. K in contrast usually sits in the middle of the frame at all times. At all times is not figurative, as the frame cleverly uses the reflection of the window to show both of them at the same time. Whenever one of the characters is speaking, the other can be seen reacting from their reflection. The positioning of the reflections hints at plot points later in the film. Dr. Stelline or her reflection, are always within K’s counterpart. Creating such a power dynamic subconsciously guides the viewers into understanding the role of each character within the scene.


(48) Birthday Work
The scene transitions into a glimpse of Dr. Stelline’s work. Pulling away from the conversation, it is revealed that another practical light hangs from the ceiling of the visiting room, aiding the particular lighting arrangement. When the main light fades, a cake appears in front of Stelline. The cake is at first viewed from a medium long shot but then transitions into a medium close up. Unlike the sterile light work lamp found in the facility, this one is warm. By Shot 26, the cake fills the frame of the camera showing specific details such as the 7 candles. The single point lighting from the candles creates an oasis of light, separating itself from the absent darkness surrounding it. The cake itself could mean new beginnings or possibly represents the question “was I born or was I created”. Whatever it may be, the cake serves as the centerpoint of the section, drawing the viewers eyes to the subjects illuminated by its light. K is not lit by this familial light, instead being silhouetted by the soft glow of the visitor room lights. 
The Birthday Work section has the shortest shots of all the other sections. Most of these shots are focused on the faces of the people surrounding the cake. All the smallest moments in time are carefully considered by Dr. Stelline. This is achieved with a series of close ups to extreme close ups to show every detail in each face. Medium shots paint larger movements and allow the viewer to see “background” characters otherwise outside of the camera. While not as heavily used, shallow focus is also employed to single out individual subjects. At Shot 29, a semi frame-within-a-frame appears where K gets briefly framed between the shoulders of a rotating child. This allows the viewer to better compare the familial nature of the cake to K, who’s isolated as well. The children are the supposed friend of the replicant, who is probably the girl blowing out the candles. Just by looking at the details of the cake and the placement of the people can we ascertain the importance of each of the subjects.


(63) The Realization
The casual viewer could pass the previous sections as “exposition dumps” as they do not have many emotional keypoints. However, this is where K’s initial inquiry finally gets answered. The section starts much like Reflections, a few shot/reverse-shots to start then a transition to the intresement. It made sense that the instrument was embedded within the window, the visor towards Dr. Stelline and a blue lens towards K. Granded, plenty of other people are also dependent on Dr. Stelline’s advice. Shot 54, the camera is still immobile, even when transitioning from standing to sitting, continuing this common motif. A still camera is more intimate as the frame captures more of the emotions of the characters. When Dr. Stelline asks for the memory to be played out in K’s head, there is no flashback or other gimmicky camera tricks. The frame stays in a close up/medium close up with K, as the sounds of the machinery hints us as to what is going on. It is up to the viewer to imagine the memory that K is experiencing and Stelline is seeing. When stelline confirms that the memory is real, the shot widens to a MCU to allow K to break down. Wherever a dark piece of clothing pasees the correct location, a small piece of Dr. Stelline can be seen as well.
Overall the scene serves to contrast the consumerist world of Blade Runner. The set design serves as a stark contrast to the outside world, supplemented by the physical representations of that isolation. Despite the medical nature of the room, it is contrastly much more genuine and human then the rest of the scenes. Despite the apparent lack of interesting details, the Memory Scene employees plenty of subtle composition tricks to enhance the plot. Moreover, the lack of elements and background allows the viewers to better appreciate the mise-en-scene of this scene. Its subtle layering makes it one of the most empathic scenes of the entire movie.
Thus concludes the memory viewer.

